CEP XXXX: Index timestamp in package record metadata (#154)
conda/ceps: cep-XXXX.md

# CEP XXXX - Upload timestamp in package record metadata

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Upload timestamp in package record metadata </td></tr>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Jannis Leidel </td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Mar 4, 2026 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Mar 4, 2026 </td></tr>

> <tr><td> Discussion </td><td> NA </td></tr>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/154 </td></tr>
```

<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>

> <tr><td> Requires </td><td> CEP 36 </td></tr>

Reviewer: I need to think what to do about this field. I think it should only be for other PRs that are open at the same time, not necessarily the ones that have been merged already. I know I replaced these URLs for 29-38 but maybe it was not a good idea.

Author: I think `Requires` is appropriate here since this CEP adds a field to the package record schema defined by CEP 36. Whether it is already merged or co-pending, the dependency relationship is the same.

Reviewer: Well, in a broad sense, all CEPs depend on the published ones unless they explicitly supersede them. I modelled this field after the PEP `requires` entry. In [PEP 12](https://peps.python.org/pep-0012/#how-to-use-this-template), they mention (emphasis mine)

> For Standards Track PEPs, if your feature depends on the acceptance of some other currently **in-development PEP**, add a Requires header right after the Type header. The value should be the PEP number of the PEP yours depends on. Don’t add this header if your dependent feature is described in a Final PEP.

Author: Good point, removed it. CEP 36 is already accepted so `Requires` doesn't apply here.

### `channeldata.json` is too coarse

[CEP 38](./cep-0038.md) specifies a `timestamp` field in `channeldata.json`, defined as "Upload date of the most recently published artifact". While this is server-controlled, it is per-package-name, not per-artifact. It only reflects the most recent upload and cannot be used to determine when a specific version or build was published.

### Ecosystem precedent

PyPI provides server-controlled `upload_time` and `upload_time_iso_8601` fields per release file in its JSON API. These are set by the PyPI server at upload time and cannot be modified by package authors. This is the foundation for reliable tools like:

- `uv --exclude-newer` and `pip --exclude-newer` for reproducible resolution
- Dependency cooldown features that delay installation of recently published packages as a supply chain security measure

> The conda ecosystem would benefit from an equivalent signal.

Author: Thanks for the pointer, I have added pixi's `exclude-newer` to the Ecosystem precedent section. This reinforces the need for a trustworthy server-controlled timestamp.

2. **Reproducible environments**: Resolving an environment as it would have looked at a specific point in time (similar to `uv --exclude-newer`), using the publication date rather than the build date.

3. **Auditing and forensics**: Determining exactly when a given artifact appeared on a channel, independent of when it was built.

## Specification

### Package record metadata

[CEP 36](./cep-0036.md) defines the schema for entries in `packages` and `packages.conda` within `repodata.json`. This CEP adds one optional field to the package record metadata:

- `upload_timestamp: int`. Optional. Unix time in milliseconds when the artifact was added to the channel index. It MUST be set by the channel server or indexing tool, not by the build tool. If absent, clients MAY fall back to `timestamp` for time-based operations.

### Channel server requirements

> Channel servers and indexing tools (such as `conda-index`, `quetz`, or Anaconda's infrastructure) SHOULD set `upload_timestamp` on each package record when the artifact is first indexed into the channel. The value MUST reflect the actual time the artifact became available in the channel, not the build time or any value from the artifact itself.

Reviewer: Given that the timestamp is going to be the time of indexation, maybe we should call it `indexed_timestamp` or `indexed_at`.

Alternatively, we could ask the indexers to peek at the file creation time on disk, but that's flaky and filesystem dependent so let's focus on "first time the package appeared on repodata".

Author: After looking into this more, I agree. Renamed to `indexed_timestamp`. The field measures when the artifact appeared in the channel index, not when it was uploaded. In conda-forge's workflow, the upload (to `cf-staging`) and indexation (appearing in the main channel's `repodata.json`) are distinct events separated by validation steps. Daniel also naturally described this as "first indexed" from the `conda-index` perspective. The name fits well alongside the existing `timestamp` field in the package record schema.

> If a channel re-indexes existing artifacts without a prior `upload_timestamp`, it MAY use the file modification time or another server-side signal as a best-effort approximation. It MUST NOT copy the value from the artifact's `timestamp` field.

Author: I have revised the re-indexing paragraph to allow seeding `indexed_timestamp` from `timestamp` for artifacts that predate this CEP. The security rationale: cooldowns protect against the initial publication window, and most supply chain attacks have windows under one week (per Woodruff's analysis). That window has long closed for existing artifacts. For newly indexed artifacts going forward, the value must be set by the server at indexing time. This should also address @baszalmstra's concern about keeping `exclude-newer` working without interruption.

> If a channel re-indexes existing artifacts without a prior `upload_timestamp`, it MAY use the file modification time or another server-side signal as a best-effort approximation. It MUST NOT copy the value from the artifact's `timestamp` field.

Author: Yes. The migration text now allows pre-CEP artifacts to seed `indexed_timestamp` from `timestamp` or another server-side signal. For artifacts first indexed after approval, `indexed_timestamp` MUST be set at indexing time. That preserves existing exclude-newer behavior without letting new packages choose their own index time.

> If a channel re-indexes existing artifacts without a prior `upload_timestamp`, it MAY use the file modification time or another server-side signal as a best-effort approximation. It MUST NOT copy the value from the artifact's `timestamp` field.

Reviewer: Maybe redundant, but the value of this field must not change regardless the source, right? Otherwise we get clunky solves if extreme `exclude-newer` configs are used. Thinking of filesystems changing `mtime` of some files by accident, and that value used for `indexed_timestamp`, for example. Shall we record that decision?

> If a channel re-indexes existing artifacts without a prior `upload_timestamp`, it MAY use the file modification time or another server-side signal as a best-effort approximation. It MUST NOT copy the value from the artifact's `timestamp` field.

Author: I agree, this invariant is worth making explicit. Suggested wording:

```suggestion
For artifacts that predate this CEP and lack an `indexed_timestamp`, channel servers MAY seed the value from the artifact's `timestamp` field or from another server-side signal such as file modification time. This is acceptable because the security benefits of `indexed_timestamp` (dependency cooldowns, exclude-newer) protect against the initial publication window, which has long closed for existing artifacts.

Once `indexed_timestamp` has been assigned for a package record, channel servers and indexing tools MUST preserve that value across subsequent indexing runs. They MUST NOT recompute it from file modification time, the artifact's `timestamp`, or any other fallback signal while an existing `indexed_timestamp` is present. Channel operators MAY correct demonstrably erroneous values as an intentional metadata correction.
```

> If a channel re-indexes existing artifacts without a prior `upload_timestamp`, it MAY use the file modification time or another server-side signal as a best-effort approximation. It MUST NOT copy the value from the artifact's `timestamp` field.

Reviewer: Perfect!

### Client behavior

Conda clients that implement time-based filtering (e.g., dependency cooldowns, exclude-newer) SHOULD prefer `upload_timestamp` when present. If `upload_timestamp` is absent, clients MAY fall back to `timestamp` with appropriate documentation that the value is builder-controlled.

> ### Schema

Author: Agreed, I have removed the schema section. The CEP now just notes that schemas.conda.org should be updated accordingly. Schemas are downstream from the CEP.

The `repodata-record-1.schema.json` at schemas.conda.org SHOULD be updated to include:

```json
"upload_timestamp": {
    "type": "integer",
    "description": "Unix time in milliseconds when the artifact was added to the channel index. Set by the channel server, not the build tool.",
    "patchable": false,
    "minimum": 0
}
```

> Note that `patchable` is `false`: unlike `timestamp`, this field SHOULD NOT be modified by repodata patching, since it represents a server-side fact.

Author: With the schema section removed, I have added a brief note in the rationale that `indexed_timestamp` is server-controlled and should not be subject to repodata patching, without prescribing a specific schema keyword for it.

### Why server-controlled

The `timestamp` field is builder-controlled and has known issues: it can be set to any value by the packager, and it reflects when the build started rather than when the package became available to users. A server-controlled field closes this gap.

### Why optional

Not all channel servers may be able to provide this field immediately. Making it optional allows gradual adoption while clients can fall back to `timestamp`.

### Backwards compatibility

Adding an optional field to existing package records in `packages` and `packages.conda` is a purely additive change. [CEP 36](./cep-0036.md) states that additional keys "SHOULD NOT be present and SHOULD be ignored", meaning older clients will silently ignore `upload_timestamp`. This does not require the repodata revision mechanism proposed in [conda/ceps#146](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/146), though it is consistent with that proposal's philosophy of backwards-compatible evolution.

This follows the same pattern as the `url` field proposed in [conda/ceps#151](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/151), which also adds an optional per-record field to the existing schema.

### Why milliseconds

> For consistency with the existing `timestamp` field (CEP 34) and `channeldata.json` timestamp (CEP 38), both of which use Unix time in milliseconds.

Author: Agreed, consistency is important here.

</table>

> The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119][RFC2119] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

[RFC2119]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119

## Abstract

This CEP proposes adding an optional `indexed_timestamp` field to per-record metadata in `repodata.json`, as specified by [CEP 36](./cep-0036.md). Unlike the existing `timestamp` field (which records build time and is set by the package builder), `indexed_timestamp` is set by the channel server when an artifact first appears in the channel index, providing a trustworthy, server-controlled record of when the package became available to users.

## Motivation

The conda ecosystem currently lacks a reliable, per-artifact indicator of when a package was made available on a channel. This gap has practical consequences for two emerging use cases: supply chain security and environment reproducibility.

### The `timestamp` field is builder-controlled

> [CEP 34](./cep-0034.md) defines `timestamp` in `info/index.json` as "Starting time of the package build", expressed as Unix time in milliseconds. This value propagates into `repodata.json` as specified by [CEP 36](./cep-0036.md). Because it is set by the build tool (`conda-build`, `rattler-build`), a package author or malicious actor can set it to any value. The `common-1` schema at schemas.conda.org also marks this field as `patchable: true`.

Reviewer: > The `common-1` schema at schemas.conda.org also marks this field as `patchable: true`.

This doesn't really change much. All repodata record fields are patchable by today's standards. You can leave it as a side not but I wouldn't want that to become a precedent for something we hold true as an ecosystem.

Author: Agreed. Removed the `schemas.conda.org` / `patchable` sentence in 4edc038. The argument now rests on CEP 34/36: `timestamp` is builder-provided and therefore unsuitable as a server-controlled publication signal.

### `channeldata.json` is too coarse

> [CEP 38](./cep-0038.md) specifies a `timestamp` field in `channeldata.json`, defined as "Upload date of the most recently published artifact". While this is server-controlled, it is per-package-name, not per-artifact. It only reflects the most recent upload and cannot be used to determine when a specific version or build was published.

Reviewer: > While this is server-controlled

Is it? I think that's an oversight in CEP 38. `conda-index` simply t[akes the largest record `timestamp` for the name](https://github.com/conda/conda-index/blob/90ea92e548316a8200dcb4d8c887fb3e13cf6d5d/conda_index/index/__init__.py#L1244-L1249), but it's not guaranteed that it's the upload time.

We should patch CEP 38, not sure if we can / should do it here. WDYT?

Author: Agreed. Reworded in 4edc038: the CEP now says CEP 38 defines the field that way, but current indexers do not reliably provide that semantic; for example, `conda-index` derives it from package record timestamps. I think CEP 38 should be patched separately rather than trying to fix it here.

> [CEP 38](./cep-0038.md) specifies a `timestamp` field in `channeldata.json`, defined as "Upload date of the most recently published artifact". Current indexer implementations do not reliably provide that exact semantic; for example, `conda-index` derives the value from package record timestamps. Even if corrected, `channeldata.json` is per-package-name, not per-artifact. It only reflects the most recent publication event and cannot be used to determine when a specific version or build was published.

Reviewer: Let's update this definition assuming https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/172 will pass.

Author: Suggested update based on conda/ceps#172:

```suggestion
[CEP 38](./cep-0038.md) specifies a `timestamp` field in `channeldata.json`, defined as the most recent `timestamp` value of all records for a package name, expressed as POSIX time in seconds. This is per-package-name, not per-artifact, and it is derived from builder-controlled package record timestamps rather than a server-controlled publication time. It cannot be used to determine when a specific version or build was published.
```

### Ecosystem precedent

PyPI provides server-controlled `upload_time` and `upload_time_iso_8601` fields per release file in its JSON API. These are set by the PyPI server at upload time and cannot be modified by package authors. This is the foundation for reliable tools like:

- `uv --exclude-newer` and `pip --exclude-newer` for reproducible resolution
- Dependency cooldown features that delay installation of recently published packages as a supply chain security measure

Within the conda ecosystem, pixi already provides an [`exclude-newer`](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/reference/pixi_manifest/#exclude-newer-optional) option, but it currently relies on the builder-controlled `timestamp` field. The conda ecosystem would benefit from a server-controlled equivalent that cannot be set by the package author.

### Channel models have different risk profiles

> The value of a server-controlled index timestamp varies by channel model. Curated channels like Anaconda's defaults already have human review gates before packages reach users, similar to the Debian model. Community forges like conda-forge release at the speed of volunteer CI, where packages can go from merged PR to indexed artifact in minutes. Cooldown support is most critical for these faster-moving channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value of a server-controlled index timestamp varies by channel model. Curated channels like Anaconda's `defaults` already have human review gates before packages reach users, similar to the Debian model. Community forges like conda-forge release at the speed of volunteer CI, where packages can go from merged PR to indexed artifact in minutes. Cooldown support is most critical for these faster-moving channels.
```

Or call it `main`.

Author: Adopted in substance in 4edc038, including backticks around `defaults`. I kept the conda-forge wording as `conda-forge` here; the later rationale already distinguishes staging from the production `conda-forge` channel.

2. Reproducible environments, where resolving an environment as it would have looked at a specific point in time (similar to `uv --exclude-newer`) uses the publication date rather than the build date.

3. Auditing and forensics, where it is useful to know exactly when a given artifact appeared on a channel, independent of when it was built.

## Specification

### Package record metadata

[CEP 36](./cep-0036.md) defines the schema for entries in `packages` and `packages.conda` within `repodata.json`. This CEP adds one optional field to the package record metadata:

- `indexed_timestamp: int`. Optional. Unix time in milliseconds when the artifact was added to the channel index. It MUST be set by the channel server or indexing tool, not by the build tool. If absent, clients MAY fall back to `timestamp` for time-based operations.

### Channel server requirements

> Channel servers and indexing tools (such as `conda-index`, `quetz`, or Anaconda's infrastructure) SHOULD set `indexed_timestamp` on each package record when the artifact is first indexed into the channel. The value MUST reflect the actual time the artifact became available in the channel, not the build time or any value from the artifact itself. The `repodata-record-1` schema at schemas.conda.org SHOULD be updated accordingly.

Reviewer: > The `repodata-record-1` schema at schemas.conda.org SHOULD be updated accordingly.

So far, CEPs have been blind to `schemas.conda.org`, and I consider them "downstream" from the CEP process. As in, this is unnecessary to add in the specification. Similar to saying "documentation mentioning this field should be updated accordingly". Feel free to remove or move to an appendix of recommendations / action items.

Author: Agreed. This stays out of the specification. In 4edc038 I also removed the other `schemas.conda.org` mention, so schema updates remain downstream of the CEP rather than normative text here.

For artifacts first indexed after this CEP is approved, the value MUST be set by the server at indexing time.

### Timestamp validation

When indexing an artifact, channel servers SHOULD validate that the artifact's `timestamp` value is not in the future and that `timestamp <= indexed_timestamp`. Artifacts that violate these constraints SHOULD be rejected or flagged, as a future `timestamp` may indicate a misconfigured build or an attempt to manipulate time-based resolution.

### Client behavior

Conda clients that implement time-based filtering (e.g., dependency cooldowns, exclude-newer) SHOULD prefer `indexed_timestamp` when present. If `indexed_timestamp` is absent, clients MAY fall back to `timestamp` with appropriate documentation that the value is builder-controlled. Clients MAY support global, channel-scoped, package-scoped, or other policy scopes, but each policy should apply the same per-record effective timestamp.

## Rationale

### Why per-record, not per-package

> `channeldata.json` (CEP 38) already tracks an upload date, but at the package-name level. Different versions and builds of the same package are published at different times, so a per-record field is necessary for meaningful time-based filtering.

Reviewer: Same here (again :D), let's assume https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/172 will pass.

Author: Suggested update based on conda/ceps#172:

```suggestion
`channeldata.json` (CEP 38) already includes a timestamp, but at the package-name level and derived from package record timestamps. Different versions and builds of the same package are published at different times, so a per-record field is necessary for meaningful time-based filtering.
```

> `channeldata.json` (CEP 38) already tracks an upload date, but at the package-name level. Different versions and builds of the same package are published at different times, so a per-record field is necessary for meaningful time-based filtering.

Reviewer: Same here, CEP 38 is sadly wrong here. Need to update.

Author: Agreed. Same resolution as above: the CEP no longer calls the `channeldata.json` timestamp server-controlled. It now notes that current indexers derive it from package record timestamps. Updating CEP 38 should be a separate cleanup.

### Why server-controlled

The `timestamp` field is builder-controlled and has known issues: it can be set to any value by the packager, and it reflects when the build started rather than when the package became available to users. A server-controlled field closes this gap.

### Why `indexed_timestamp`, not `upload_timestamp`

The field measures when the artifact appeared in the channel index, not when it was uploaded. In many conda workflows, these are distinct events. For example, conda-forge uploads built artifacts to a staging channel (`cf-staging`), validates them, and only then copies them to the production `conda-forge` channel where they are indexed into `repodata.json`. The `conda-index` maintainer also describes this as tracking when a package was "first indexed" rather than when it was uploaded.

The name `indexed_timestamp` accurately reflects this, and fits naturally alongside the existing `timestamp` field in the package record schema.

### Not subject to repodata patching

> Because `indexed_timestamp` is a server-controlled fact about when an artifact entered the index, it should not be modified by repodata patching. Repodata patches are intended for correcting package-side metadata (such as dependency constraints), not for altering server-side provenance.

Reviewer: May want to use capital letters here:

```suggestion
Because `indexed_timestamp` is a server-controlled fact about when an artifact entered the index, it SHOULD NOT be modified by repodata patching. Repodata patches are intended for correcting package-side metadata (such as dependency constraints), not for altering server-side provenance.
```

And I'd argue it should be a MUST NOT, but we don't have a CEP for this, yet. Maybe for the next batch of standards? Sooon :D

Author: Applied `SHOULD NOT` in 4edc038. I agree `MUST NOT` is the direction, but repodata patching semantics are bigger than this one field and probably deserve their own standards pass.

### Why optional

Not all channel servers may be able to provide this field immediately. Making it optional allows gradual adoption while clients can fall back to `timestamp`.

### Backwards compatibility

Adding an optional field to existing package records in `packages` and `packages.conda` is a purely additive change. [CEP 36](./cep-0036.md) states that additional keys "SHOULD NOT be present and SHOULD be ignored", meaning older clients will silently ignore `indexed_timestamp`. This does not require the repodata revision mechanism proposed in [conda/ceps#146](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/146), though it is consistent with that proposal's philosophy of backwards-compatible evolution.

This follows the same pattern as the `url` field proposed in [conda/ceps#151](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/151), which also adds an optional per-record field to the existing schema.

### Why milliseconds

> For consistency with the existing `timestamp` field (CEP 34) and `channeldata.json` timestamp (CEP 38), both of which use Unix time in milliseconds.

Reviewer: Note that CEP 38's timestamp is in seconds.

See https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/172

Author: Suggested update based on conda/ceps#172:

```suggestion
For consistency with the existing package record `timestamp` field defined by CEP 34, which uses Unix time in milliseconds. The `channeldata.json` timestamp defined by CEP 38 uses seconds, but `indexed_timestamp` belongs to package records in `repodata.json` and should follow the package record convention.
```
